Cardiff Carnival 25th anniversary project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Holly Jo Smith.
The location is the Swiffer office and the date today is the 17th of October 2015.
Holly, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full for us for the record please?
I can.
H-O-L-L-Y-J-O-S-M-I-T-H.
That's fantastic, thank you very much.
At what point did you first come across the Cardiff Carnival?
So my first time I ever did the carnival I was three months old, I was in my mum's arms,
I had a little costume on and I had little bits of face paint on and I was tiny.
I can honestly say that in all the interviews we've done, that's the youngest participant
that we've recorded so far.
So you get some kind of prize just by starting, you know, it's like, you know, carnival baby.
And it must have only been in its second or third year.
Yeah, very early.
I'm 22 now.
Yep.
Wow, that's extraordinary.
So directly or indirectly, Cardiff Carnival and Swicker have been there either at the
forefront or the background of your life.
It has.
Since the onset.
That's incredible.
I've got a lot to answer for obviously.
So in terms of obviously your mum, you know, fabulous visual artist, educator and carnival
artist and you know, she introduced to the world carnival very early.
What's the memories do you have of as a child playing, playing mass, being in carnival here
in Cardiff?
I just remember it always seeming to be carnival.
That's just what it was about.
So we started, my mum didn't work for them then.
So we'd just go along and make stuff.
It was, it was pretty constant.
It was, is it some holidays?
Isn't it?
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
So we'd go down there quite a lot and just help out with all the things.
And there was always people drumming and there's always like bits of dance workshops going
on.
I just remember being able to just run around.
Some space.
Freedom.
Just be able to do whatever we wanted.
And it was, there was like the park really close by and we just, it was, it was just
a lot of freedom just surrounded by really nice people.
Lots of pretty colours.
Colours are always good.
Do you have any costumes from your childhood that you were particularly fond of or perhaps
ones you ultimately...
I remember one I hated.
Did you hate, did you love the Alps back to us?
Or in fact, are there costumes where you thought like, oh my God.
There's one in particular that I remember.
Excellent, this is a good memory.
I think I was probably in the middle of the night.
I was probably in the middle of the night.
And I didn't know what I was getting when I was going down there.
My mum said I was going to be an aeroplane and I thought, oh, could be quite cool.
But I ended up with this big white aeroplane that had bananas on it and it just wasn't
cool at the time.
No, no, this was, I think it was a fair trade type problem, wasn't it?
It was, yeah, it was.
And then...
That was one of the best carnivals, I think, in full.
But I just happened to have a costume I didn't want.
You didn't crash the plane on purpose or anything, did you?
No, I think I walked grumpily for a little bit and then got into a way the end of it.
I hear about protests, you know.
Oh God, I can't believe it.
There were definitely some amazing costumes.
The one that I probably liked the most, I had like a rainbow skirt, really, really long,
stripes went vertically.
And it was just like, just swirling it round.
I just loved it.
That was probably a couple of years before that.
So I was probably only about eight or something.
I can see it in my mind's eye.
You had a fairly large yellow hat on as well.
Yes, yes.
You had pink tops and it was like a candy stripe skirt.
Look, how good am I?
I can remember.
You're very good.
No, no, absolutely.
Because in fact, my daughter, Non, was in that group as well and your mum led it.
And they were bright yellow hats, I think.
Yeah, really yellow.
And really, yeah, I was a great group.
I can remember.
Do you know what the makeup was like?
I think it was white faces.
I think you had white faces with a bit of, yeah.
I don't know.
And I can see you at the end at the oval basin, dancing like dervishes.
I mean, you know, top quality carnival.
That's fantastic.
So, costumes.
So we have your favourite, the candy stripe skirt.
And I'll make sure that we actually get some of those pictures into the
accompanying documentation.
And then we have also a very important part or a youthful member,
you still are youthful, of the Carnival crew,
which went on to sort of break out beyond Carnival and attempt to do
Carnival theatre.
Can you tell me a bit about that?
What do you remember about those experiences?
Dragon in particular.
Yes.
So what was that like for you being in it?
It was great.
I loved it.
It was like the social part of it as well, wasn't it?
It was like it was weekly.
It was just people from all different strokes of the world.
Wow.
From Cardiff, I guess.
And just it was just it was just lush.
And I loved the costumes.
And the costumes were really big, weren't they?
We were always a white dragon.
I'm pretty sure I was always a white dragon.
Because those are the pictures we've got of you online to accompany the interview.
Occasionally, did we do a phase of blue?
I know we were mostly red and white.
Mostly red and white.
There's some blue dragons in other projects, but.
Because I remember being blue for something.
I tried to think.
Maybe that was something else.
No, absolutely.
I want to discuss about the Blue Devils.
I know I think I might have done Blue Devils once.
Yes.
But that was another favourite to watch.
Yeah.
My mum was amazing.
And Andiola.
I just yeah, that was such a good.
I loved it.
Yes.
The red mouth and the blue and the horns.
Blood capsules, the whole shebang.
It was extraordinary.
It really was.
So I remember.
So where would you have gone with the Carnival crew on the Dragon Carnival Theatre Tour?
I know that there's some lovely pictures of you.
You appear to be levitating in one of them, which is quite a clever trick.
You don't mind me saying so.
And that's at a castle.
It's a daytime gig, which is quite interesting.
And you're there and your wings and the whole the whole the white dragon tribe is coming out.
Everyone else is walking along and you appear to be about a foot in the air.
It's just like, hang on.
The wings are real.
Absolutely.
It makes you wonder how the hell she doing that?
But there we are.
The force is strong in this one.
So you obviously did that.
I think it's when I think about it, it's is it called a castle or somewhere like that?
Rings a bell.
Yeah.
But would you have done what other gigs would you have done with the Carnival crew?
I did it for at least a year.
Excellent.
If not two.
Would you have done one of the early shows down the bay when we were opening for a big
Spanish thing and we had Wonder Brass performing and the rest of it?
What was it like?
It was so busy.
It was, wasn't it?
There's a lot of people.
It was kind of when I was just coming out of high school, wasn't it?
So I kept seeing loads of people from my high school and being like, it's me.
They wouldn't recognise you in all the body paint.
Oh my god, it's Holly.
Holly.
Holly who?
I think that's fantastic.
The whole disguise of it and the rest of it.
Quite incredible.
So Carnival costumes.
Yeah.
And of course, one year you were a trainee as well, which is fantastic.
What was that like as an experience?
I mean, I loved it.
Yeah, absolutely loved it.
Yeah.
It was just like learning new things.
It was making the big backpacks that I liked the best because you can really make an impact
with those.
So the costumes are obviously amazing, but it's the big backpacks and working alongside
people.
Like Kath that year, what did she make?
Was it a big swan?
Oh, I could well believe that, which was worn by Thelma.
Yeah.
Beautiful, beautiful swan.
Yes.
It was amazing.
I remember I made like a huge owl backpack and I was very proud of it.
There were definitely images of that going to be on the archives, so I didn't realise
that you were behind that.
Yeah.
Beautiful, beautiful.
So come the day, of course, when you're part of the team, of course, you can't be in full
costume, can you?
I mean, we've got pictures of you with...
That was one of my favourite years I did again.
And you've got your tool belt on and you can see all the animators, all the arts workers,
they're not in full costume and they clearly are ready to staple gun anything that moves
or stitch something or gaffer taping.
There's a cable tie.
Absolutely.
You look like warriors.
We are carnival warriors.
I remember it was like the day before, I think we were like, what are we going to wear if
we just had these boiler suits and we just covered them and sprayed them?
It looks excellent.
This is what we're wearing.
No, no, I think it was great.
It was like you were off the carnival, but you clearly weren't in a full costume, but
you were there like technicians you looked like on the road.
So like, can we fix it?
I think that was probably my favourite year I ever did.
Really?
It was just such a buzz, getting to go up to all the different bands, having a dance
with everyone, all the different groups.
And because obviously you're working on making the costumes, you get to know a lot of people
who are in the carnival as well.
So you get to see a lot of the faces.
So to actually see it on the road.
And then the crowd as well and people are asking you questions and I felt very well
equipped to answer them.
Well, you really are a carnival trans, aren't you?
You're born up with it around you.
That said, there's sad news we discussed earlier, which is due to withdrawal of funding from
the Arts Council of Wales.
So we're going to have a lot of fun, but it's a bit of a long story.
So I'm just going to go ahead and start by asking you a question.
I'm going to start by asking you a question.
What is your, yes, I know, not a quite sad moment in our history.
We've managed to stagger through 26 years in various costumes and thousands of people
have taken part and hundreds of thousands have seen different things over the years.
What?
Yes.
What's it meant to you?
I mean, you really have grown up in it.
It's been part of your life.
It's really sad.
It's like, you know, not every year I've been really involved in it or not every year
I've even gone to see it, but I've always known it's there.
And it is just something that I've always done my whole life and it's not going to be
there anymore.
It's part of the fabric of Cardiff.
So, well, we're not going to finish on a low note.
Before we go any further and to end with, I'd like to award you the fictional and entirely
non-pecuniary title of Holly.
You are in fact a carnival hero and you'll go down as such.
And thank you very much indeed for sharing your memories with us.
No worries.
Thanks for having me.